Expedition 2 - North-East Castle

We arrived by horse. The horses did not like the dead trees. There was also a dead body. The body was a half-orc struck by a big metallic arm. Spike saw the other trap, a metal wire, Aburaguzgul broke the trap and took it with them. Spike did not see the next trap, Spike got hurt. No more traps.

We saw the high towers of the Castle as we moved past the dead forest. A big bridge with headless statues. We heard a big dunk dunk, dunk dunk, dunk dunk in slow pace. There were three not-alive armors on the ground, and a big Hammer without hands making the dunk dunk.

A voice from inside the Castle said we had to kill the Hammer. Aburaguzgul tried to do something with it but then the Hammer stopped and went crazy. Aburaguzgul took the metal wire and trapped the Hammer. One of the dead armors punched Aburaguzgul in the side, then it died again. Baalthemyr killed it in the end, it shattered.

Inside the dead armor was Dwarvish Runes, "Live, Fight, Protect - Lev, Kjemp, Beskytt". The runes had been ruined by impact.

The voice inside the Castle said to meet us inside, we could not use the main door and it could not open it for us. We climbed into a big crack. On the other side there was another armor. The armor launched at Ignur. Aburaguzgul made a greasy circle. Spike made the greasy circle go fire. The armor went on fire. Ritz arrow killed it finally when hitting the runes.  

Inside the Castle was very old and mossy, it looked dead. There was a big stone Tower, with small towers very high up. There was also a small wood house, the roof had collapsed. Aburaguzgul went in, but found nothing. The door to the big Tower was also mossy, with two big initials QC. Then we found the first room which did not look abandoned, lit with candles and furniture.

Ritz walked to a broomstick and talked to it. Suddenly the Broomstick talked back. And then the Puff. And then the Armchair. And then the Dresser. The Carpet. They talked. They were talking furniture.

The Puff had been shouting to us from inside the Castle when we fought the Hammer.

The furniture told us about the great wizard they are waiting for, who went away a long time ago and had yet returned. The wizard had made them into thinking-furnitures because he was lonely.

They asked us to do them a favor, in return they would give us some treasures from the wizard. They wanted us to take the boat in the basement and kill all the almost dead armors in the north Tower. In the north Tower there was an armor who could write the Dwarvish runes to make them alive and fight. The furniture did not like these armors. They were vague about why.

We were suspicious.They did not want us to tell us the name of the wizard. We asked about the trap in the forest. They lied about it. But we said yes to the deal.

After walking 40ft we changed our minds, everyone but Ignur. We did want the treasures from the wizard but why bother killing the armors. So we went into the forbidden area. It had fire traps and a disappearing staircase. Walking further there was a big room with 4  stone columns and a stone door. The furniture busted us. We acted stupid and went back.

Suddenly the fog-horn came, and we now knew we had to get going. But then we changed our minds again. The furniture had told us that the towers were above the fog and we would survive up there. Now Ignur also wanted to see what was behind the stone door. Ritz threatened the furniture with a torch and they ran away.

Baalthemyr opened the stone door and searched the room with her eyes. No traps. So everybody ran in. There was a trap. The staircase disappeared and the floor gave in. Ignur ran to the door. Aburaguzgul and Ritz fell in the pit. The pit had hundreds of skeletons. Aburaguzgul survived and climbed up a rope. Ritz was unconscious. Baalthemyr ran away. The furniture showed up. Now angry with teeth. Aburaguzgul made a greasy circle again. Ignur shouted at Baalthemyr to save Ritz. Baalthemyr changed her mind and came back, saved Ritz and Aburaguzgul got her. Ritz made the greasy circle go fire. The furniture was burning.

We ran away, but Ignur was struck by the Dresser. Aburaguzgul took unconscious Ignur with them.

Important information gathered:

Traps in the forest. Half-orc with trifecta coins found dead.
Castle was abandoned, moss everywhere and dirt.
Magical items such as hammer, armor and furniture were alive.
Armor and hammer had inscriptions “Live, Fight, Protect” in Dwarvish runes, if runes were broken the magical item died.
The wizard owning the castle most likely has the initials QC.
There is a forbidden part of the castle, most likely a high tower where you can survive the fog.
The furniture did not want to tell us everything they know about the wizard and the castle.
There is an armor that can make other fighting armors become alive by carving runes on them.
Many creatures/people have tried to enter the castle and failed.