Expedition 7 - Red Moon, Blue Stone

We rode far. Several hours, out to the mountains. Large fine mountains, lots of exciting types of stone.

Red smoke rose from behind the mountains. Or. It was down. The smoke went down.

We rode up the mountain, triggered an avalanche. The horses were fast enough. We were not buried.

Down in the valley we found the big red crater. It was alive. A kind of pillow with a muscle-like living organism in the middle.

Hot steam shot up from the pillow. Spike tried to cut a hole in the pillow - not smart. Gas explosion and burns all over the body.

The warm air began to seep out. The organism slowly sank into the hole. Meanwhile we went north and explored the valley. We found a dwarven village, crushed under huge round stones.

I found some fragments of the stones nearby. The material had a bluish tone, very fine in structure. The stone mass was softer than normal stone and therefore also significantly easier to shape. Unfortunately, I did not have time to examine the density on the spot, but I have done so afterwards - this is undoubtedly a high-quality stone variety. If only we had the resources to ship the big blue stones home to Stone-upon-hill, we could create wonderful structures. This reminds of the importance of completing The Forge as soon as possible.

Only one of the houses was not destroyed. In the house we found a skeleton - dwarf. And a plate with a symbol representing the Fire God Vallaka.

We took a nap on top of the round rock. Not clever. A new bautasten came flying and smashed into us.

Baalthemyr and Maurice were smashed into the ground. Fell into a cave. We followed.

Antonio tied a rope so we could get down. Spike, Ignur and Antonio almost died from the fall. Antonio's fingers are too smooth to tie knots. Don't trust Antonio's knots.

Down in the cave we were attacked by 7 flatfish-like monsters that lived in the ground. We quickly cleared them out of the way.

Further inside the cave was a stone with cracks - an intense red light poured out.

Baalthemyr was engulfed in the red light. Went over and touched the stone.

The red light spoke in a voice that the rest of us did not understand. Baalthemyr broke the stone. Intense red light poured out. We were engulfed in a new world, full of stars, sand and transparent flatfish monsters. Baalthemyr spoke to the red light. Asked if we wanted to stop her - I don't know what it was we were supposed to stop - at least we didn't stop her. I didn't understand what Baalthemyr and the light were talking about, but suddenly we flew back into the cave.

Baalthemyr took the red light with him and passed out. 14 flatfish monsters appeared on the roof of the cave.

Antonio Juan grabbed his saxophone and played. Finally his smooth fingers could be used for something. He cast a spell on the monsters so that they all fell down and died.

I examined the stone material that had formed a shell around the red light before Baalthemyr crushed it. A reddish, very porous stone quality. However, there was something special about the material which, on later examination, proved to be highly usable, despite the stone's low density.

Spike had found a 'Ring of Jumping' and quickly helped us back to the surface.

The adventure felt complete, but the fog still hadn't come.

We chose to ride further northwest, towards the place where the boulder had come flying from.

A distant rumbling sound. The sound came from the sea, which we could just make out at the end of the valley. We assumed it must be a gigantic creature snoring underwater - approximately 20 kilometers away. So a rather loud snoring.

Maurice used his sharp glasses to discover a gigantic castle on top of a mountain (the blue mountain range that can be seen all the way from Stone-Upon-Hill). Red light in the castle's windows.

We rode for a long time and encountered a landscape full of bridges. Huge bridges built of blue stone.

We approached the bridge, but discovered a large creature guarding the bridge.

A troll. 15 feet tall.

The fog came. We rode home again.