Expedition 6 - Carpet is ålreit
Company - Dwyghte Lifebringer, Figma Unitree, "Snella" Sticki Frick Farick, Thaddeus Tinfoyle and Fiona Halv-Firs

REMEMBER! Create code names for all expedition members.

Light snow on the road. Znella wears a mirror dress, ready for battle as always. Sigma has with a blob. Liona's horse Ferdinand looks confident and beautiful. Ajax and Phaddeus look like they smell. Twyghte also has a horse.

The expedition starts quite interestingly already at the first forest clearing. Fhaddeus sees an engraved mark on a tree trunk. A circular mark with a skull in the center. He carefully walks over to investigate further, watching for what might appear behind the next tree trunk. He takes meticulous notes and draws the symbol in his book. He looks up wide-eyed as another symbol appears on the tree trunk, it seems to be carved in by an invisible hand. At the same time, the rest of the group stand a little at a distance and look very amused. The hero Twyghte approaches the trembling Fhaddeus and is able to reveal that Znella has been cheating.

Dead trees. Damp mist. The castle. Where did the previous group put the horses? It has become very dark, but we can all see well in the dark. Except Twyghte, who follows the sounds of us.

A metal stick sticks out of a tree. Is it a trap? Halvork corpse on the ground, obviously killed by the metal stick. Is it safe? The group cautiously steps forward to loot. All the pockets have already been turned inside out, there is nothing of value. The next group can ignore the corpse.

"Only fools rush in" says the group, and ride towards the castle. They stop in front of the bridge to survey the surrounding area for traps. Bronze statues without heads sit and… watch. Ahead at the castle door, a headless suit of armor leans against the door, an arrow sticking out of its back. Three others lie lifeless on the ground, a battle has clearly taken place here. Fhaddeus is really tired and the rest of the group regrets that they didn't make more of previous chronicles. The armor was surely beaten down by the brave warriors who came here before us. There must be limits to how careful one must be. Sigma is very keen on the arrow sticking out of his armor and brings Liona, who is impatient and a little unfocused - the chronicle needs notes! The rest of the group study the bronze statues and discuss the way forward. Suddenly the armor swings the sword around and strikes an unsuspecting Sigma. It misses and she quickly runs away, so that Liona can be the hero who saves everyone. Thanks Sigma!

Liona starts dancing. Light on toes, like a cat. A big cat. A tiger, just easy. Hair waves in the wind. The armor slams into Liona, who elegantly responds with Shield. The armor hits her in the chin with its longsword, but Liona only gets a scratch. Huh! She shakes off her surprise and smiles. This could be a fight for the history books! A delicious Mind Sliver leaves her mouth and crashes into the armor's head. Above the neck there is only air. She decides to make a tactical retreat, and when the armor is about to attack, she uses another well-rehearsed Shield.

The rest of the match has been replayed afterwards.

Twyghte hears all the noise from the battle that is taking place on the other side of the bridge, and heroic as he is, he runs as hard as he can towards the sounds. If he could see too, he wouldn't have tripped over corpse armor. Znella fires her trusty Eldritch Blast, and the armor's first dent is a fact. Sigma has now acquired the Hunter's Mark and goes straight for a critical strike that rips the armor, as it comes running at her at full speed. Fortunately, Fhaddeus has seen this coming in one of his less conspiratorial dreams, and manages to shout to Sigma how to avoid both blows. Znella sends another Eldritch Blast, and the armor gives up its life for this time.

Liona opens her eyes to see a group of grateful heroes around her, clearly impressed by her sacrifice. "Only fools rush in", mutters Fhaddeus.

The group has decided not to identify themselves as the Trifecta Line Company, but as adventurers from the East who are here to gain wisdom from the Wizard. The group tries to knock on the gate, but gets no answer. Znella tries to push open the door and Twyghte decides to help by pushing Znella. None of them are very strong. Krakilus flies over the wall and can tell that boulders are stacked in front of the door. Impossible to move. The wall is only 15 feet high, so maybe you can climb over it? Sigma has a rope and suggests hooking it to the top so the rest can follow. Fhaddeus sees a crack in the wall, which he realizes he has read about in the chronicles. Sigma is already on her way over the wall and jumps up like a mountain goat, until she doesn't. She lands with a thud on the bridge again, her shoulder out of joint. Twyghte walks over and tries to snap her into place. It might have worked. The group concentrates on the crack in the wall again. There is a very narrow path between the wall and the water to get there. Znella asks Twyghte to be carried, she is so small and cold. He lifts her up and immediately loses control of his own balance. They trip over

Sigma looks into the telescope, straight into the wall. The group will pull the lever. They do, and the whole castle shakes. The stone wall opens and we can now see through the telescope, aimed at a mountain with a crack. With purple light. Flower valley! The telescope appears to be locked in that direction. The movement mechanism is broken. Znella looks at the workbench. The drawers are emptied, the bench is smashed. She blows the ashes aside and finds something underneath. A parchment scroll with dwarven words. Sigma reads:


never before… such love… one of the gods? The bards that Hrakk and the lackeys worship? If not for them…

can't go south, must stay… though… it's growing, a pattern is forming… dare not, Yurret must… even if he doesn't want to… … come back Yurret… come… my strength is draining him…

Something about Quen, the Queen and the lackey, the group concludes.

No sign of Puff. Puff is smart. Is Puff Queen? Puff has us all fooled. Puff is brilliant.

The group gets nervous.


At the end of the corridor, which has collapsed, it is impossible to get past. Fhaddeus sees in the gravel that someone has taken chair legs and stuffed them in the gravel, like a path through. In retrospect, it can be thought of as Puff. More on that in a moment. The group crawls under the pillars, carefully following the chair markings. On the other side is a bright corridor with lit torches and two staircases. Fhaddeus treads carefully on the first staircase, it goes well. Znella uses Disguise Self, now looks like a tiger blanket. A new red, metallic door meets the group. Fhaddeus opens it and the group sees the inside of a tower where everything has collapsed. You can see all the way to the top. There is a mirror behind the door and Fhaddeus takes another ritual. Znella floats in front of the mirror, and suddenly sees that she is holding a gray staff in her left hand. Paw. Sigma also holds a staff in his reflection. Everyone is holding a stick in their mirror image! Twyghte is unable to get rid of the staff, it is stuck in his hand. Ten minutes later, Fhaddeus informs the group that the mirror has an Illusion spell around it, but he also casts a Fireball spell on the back. The group stops showing off in front of it. Fhaddeus discovers that the walls are full of burn marks. He tries to see if there is something behind the mirror, but when it makes a faint creaking sound, he carefully lets it go and takes a few steps backwards. The group moves on and opens the door to the north. A large room with gold and even a very telescope.

"Okay, and who are you then?", the group hears from a Puff!

Liona talks to Puff and they have a very stimulating conversation. Puff hates groups of five. He only has one friend left after someone sent all the others through a meat grinder last week. Teppe is certainly a very good friend. The rest of the group goes around touching things. Fhaddeus opens the wall and looks into the telescope. It looks down towards the floor. He says an unknown word and the telescope turns to the west. Znella wants to pet Puff, but Puff is strict and asks us to keep 20 feet away. Groups of five are suspicious. Fhaddeus says "Quen" and the telescope turns right up. He tries to turn the telescope again, but something stops it. There are dwarven runes underneath. Znella finds a stone tablet with dwarven writing and asks Sigma to read it.


"The rift" says Sigma, in Dwarven. The telescope turns south-east. She sees a rift with red light shining out, the ground torn apart as if by an earthquake.


"Desert disaster" she says. The telescope turns. Massive sand dunes covered in snow, far to the east.


The third has been stressed many, many times. Black Marrow. Sigma doesn't dare say it out loud in Dwarven.


She does it anyway.

She dare not look.


She does it anyway.


Black mountains, like thorns. Waves crash against it. Old machinery and a black gate that stretches high up over the mountainside. The black mountain stares back at her. Black Marrow. Znella sees too. She wants to go there one day.

Fhaddeus sees his cut to sneak past Puff while Liona keeps a very interesting conversation going. He crashes into an invisible wall, and Puff suddenly becomes skeptical of his five new friends. The group asks if he wants a jar of red stuff, which he then accuses us of stealing from the castle. Fhaddeus openly pours some orange liquid into the jar, which Puff amazingly does not get. Puff calls out to his last friend in the world, and Teppe comes snaking down from the ceiling. Teppe swallows the jar's contents and becomes best friends with Liona. Teppe is also a very good cape.

Puff is a little impatient and irritable, but he makes the same offer to this group as the last. Kill the armors and get lots of nice stuff from Puff. Teppe can join to help.

Twyghte doesn't understand why we don't just kill Puff. The rest of the group are afraid of Puff. Puff is smart. Rather kills the armors. Znella asks if Puff wants us to do something bad. A large demon mouth forms from Puff's pillows and an eerie voice assures us that he is our friend. Puff is scary. We are walking. Carpet leads the way. Teppe throws a chain down from the tower we can climb down, and at the bottom Twyghte fastens the chain to the ground. Smart.

Znella's rats are still gone, and no amount of nagging from her can lure them into the light. The group follows Teppe further north and they get into a boat. Liona controls it with Shape Water, and the group is unanimous that it is The Best Cantrip. Carpet coughs a little, but is otherwise in good shape. A little slime hits Liona here and there. The group arrives at the tower and Sigma has a rope. She throws the end up to the broken bridge. It lands in the water. Fhaddeus is no longer depressed about how useless his psychic abilities are against non-psyched armor, because he has Mage Hand and is useful to the party. He attaches the rope and they climb up. There is a door with three swords hanging crosswise on it. Znella steps forward and carefully touches one of the swords. Very carefully. They immediately begin to glow blue and rise into the air. They turn their tips towards us. Teppe insists that we must kill them. We agree, but would like to avoid getting stung. Fhaddeus tries to make a Minor Illusion sound, but the swords don't care. Mage Hand tries to grab the swords and they attack. Sigma notices that they have runes on the back and shouts "take them from behind!" to the group, before she does just that. The first sword falls lifelessly to the ground. Znella uses Eldritch Blast against sword number two, but regrets it as she is standing right next to it. She surprises everyone by standing by her choices, and now the sword melts down the table. Luck or skill? It has no time to think more, because it is still a living sword swinging through the air. The third sword has the runes on the side of the egg. The up-to-date reader has probably already understood this, but for the rest of you, swords do not always have the runes in the same place. Everyone is different, but that's on the outside. The fight continues, but Liona misses with her Fire Bolt. Sigma also misses, before Znella throws some glitter into the air, melts the last sword and does a little pirouette in the mud. Her dress is clearly dirty.

The group stealths outside the tower.

Znella goes and slams open the doors. Scattered around and on top of each other are piles of moss-grown armor. A thin and half-broken suit of armor walks around and drags them. Hammering can be heard from the second floor, so this armor is not the Armor. Znella sends an Eldritch Blast at it, but misses badly. The hammering from above stops. Liona sends a Fire Bolt, but only heats the walls. Fhaddeus encourages her to try again. It helps, the armor collapses. Liona tries to say hello on common, but gets no response. Liona tries to say hello in gnomic. It is quiet in the tower. Liona says hello in Elvish and wants with all her heart to hear a friendly voice answer her. Nothing.

Znella and Liona go up the stairs to the second floor, together with Teppe hanging around Liona's shoulders. At the end of the room sits a four meter tall Armor, with a hammer in one hand and a regular sized suit of armor in the other! It has an armor head!

The group makes it up the stairs and is about to hatch a plan. Znella sends a Witch Bolt at Armor.

Znella is very slow, so before the magic has left her limp fingers Rustning manages to throw a spear in her direction. She falls over. He throws one at Liona, who with the help of a perfectly executed Shield spell, and a tug from Teppe, manages to duck away. Liona attacks with an enormous force rarely observed this far north in the continent. Armor screeches, acid runs down the arm and the gaze turns to her. She can see something behind Rustning's eyes. Is it jealousy? Horror? Anger? Hard to say, but a tactical retreat towards the stairs felt strategically correct at the moment. Sigma runs over and starts dragging Znella towards the stairs. Like a relay runner, Fhaddeus takes over the lifeless body and continues towards the exit. Twyghte is face to face with Armor and is ready to protect his friends. He runs the opposite way and brings Znella back to consciousness. She jumps up and is very ready to escape. She is now the first out the door. Congratulations, Znella. Armor turns to face Sigma who is now standing there alone. He hits. Sigma is gutted like a fish. He turns to Liona, who doesn't budge an inch.

The rest of the match has been replayed afterwards.


The surviving adventurers hear a familiar but horrifying horn in the distance. Teppe grabs Liona and drags her down the stairs. Fhaddeus conjures a furious warrior who runs towards the Armor. Twyghte, The Last Hero, confidently runs forward to save Sigma. He is unable to lift her. Znella runs out into the boat. Armor charges up to attack, throwing the spear at the enraged warrior. The warrior disappears as quickly as he came, it was nothing more than Fhaddeus who had learned to drive the gjøn. Armor turns towards Twyghte and throws a spear. It hits, but he's still standing. Liona is unconscious, but does not appear to be in great danger of bleeding out. Sigma now looks categorically bad. Teppe drags Liona on and has got her all the way to the front door! Fhaddeus thinks that Liona is in the greatest danger and runs to stabilize her. The horn is heard again in the distance. Twyghte once again tries to lift Sigma, and this time he succeeds! He runs towards the stairs with Sigma thrown over him. Znella is in the boat outside, patiently waiting for the carnage to end. Armor stomps a hole across the floor, huge stones thunder across the room. The crack in Liona's skull turns out to be worse than first thought. Sigma drips blood like an overflowing gutter. Teppe drags Liona further out onto the bridge where Fhaddeus stabilizes her. She is unconscious, but will see the sun rise again. Fhaddeus, on the other hand, can only see the blue mist rolling over the horizon. Twyghte doesn't know whether to run on with Sigma on his shoulders or heal her. They would run much faster if he didn't have to carry her on his weak shoulders. So then the decision is made. Additionally, Twyghte dreams of being an extra heroic hero, so with Armor hot on his heels, he sacrifices his Movement speed to revive her while throwing her forward towards the door. She wakes up, still floating in the air, confused. She blinks. Behind her, she can see Twyghte pick up his shield and turn to Armor. Was that a smile she saw?


Znella sits quietly in the boat.

Before she dashes up to the door, where she sees the situation unfolding inside. Sigma has woken up and is trying to get to his feet. Twyghte has turned away from the group, determined to be the last man out, while Rustning grabs the floor and rips it open like a tin can opener. It stretches towards him. At the same time Teppe rolls Liona into the boat to save her from potential dangers. She barks hard for a year. She is now dying again. Sigma limps all the way to the boat, and now she too sees the mist rolling down the valley. Fhaddeus steadies Liona once more, before grabbing the oars and calling out to those who remain. Twyghte runs as hard as he can and can get all the way down into the boat. He instead stops in the doorway to save Znella, who had returned to watch. With blood, sweat and possibly a few tears smeared across his forehead, he places the shield in front of her and tells her to run. Znella doesn't hurt to pray. Armor looks right at Twyghte, but has finally run out of spears! It picks up a boulder. But it misses! It throws another stone. Hitting the wall! Liona lies unconscious, while Fhaddeus, Znella and Sigma sit helpless in the boat. Fhaddeus creates an illusion of Znella in hopes that Rustning will attack it, but even Rustning knows she is in the boat. Twyghte runs out the door. He comes leaping down from the bridge, shield in one hand and a brilliant light out of the other. The moon glitters blue and cold in the night, and in front of it the group sees a masculine silhouette reveal itself. He points his arm at Liona, and still mid-floating, he winks confidently at his colleagues, who stand wide-eyed and gaping, while the light shoots out from his fingertips.

Again, Liona is once again conscious, again.

Liona is instantly able to perceive the situation, and while the rest of the group tries to share two oars of four people and a blanket, Liona uses The Best Cantrip one last time for the evening. The fog is closer than ever. The boat hits the castle with a crash and they run into the castle yard. Znella calls out to the rats, but gets no answer. A few seconds later, the group, led by Znella, run as fast as they can to the horses. They've made it! Once on their horses and with the fog a distant memory, our heroes can finally relax, a good piece of work behind them. Liona immediately feels something slip from her shoulders. They stop. Behind her, the group sees Teppe standing on the road, lonely and slimy. Teppe waves at them, and says a quick but mournful goodbye before it starts to wind its way back towards the castle.