Expedition 13 First encounter with Black Marrow

The Abandoned Station:

Nothing to pick up but a bunch of iron bars (Aburaguzgul has taken ownership of these for his further work). Found another proof that trees and plants absorb the mist - tried to take a sample of sap, got it on my face.

Otherwise, the station is… abandoned (shock!). Quite an impatient bunch, with a closer search you might find something?

The way there:

We rode between "Trollmannsborgen" and "Flengen." We saw signs that something had happened at the castle; the bridge and moat blown to pieces and the way in open.

Someone has burst in, or out (up and down are the same distance, out and in are equally narrow - unless someone just bursts their way in - as we say where I come from). Should be explored ASAP. Feel free to bring my rats back in that case.

Heard the screams of the big Roc bird, the screams created terror among the participants who had encountered it before, I thought it had a melancholy and somewhat beautiful sound, but then I have encountered many exciting and dangerous things in my life, unlike before example Fiona.

Outside Black Marrow:

Not a very nice place, but it had a certain… majestic and terrifying charm. Almost poetic. Big black tips, like a giant dragon's jaw. A staircase and a high gate on the way in. The first thing we discover is a lot of skulls on the ground, drag marks lead us to a headless dwarf skeleton that is chained to a rock out in the square - no other information found about the skeleton. We find the answer to the Hode mystery inside the rock.

The entrance is blocked with four large iron bars (we also find signs that spears have been used which have long since rotted away). Some didn't want what was in there to come out. The signs pointed to it being many years (how many?) ago, so we decided to go inside.

Inside the Black Marrow:

The architecture inside really does not disappoint! A black hall illuminated by red, floating light illusions at the very top of the ceiling. Dramatically! Beautiful! I ask myself who and how - how long has this magic lasted and who created it? Something that looked like railroad tracks on the floor (also outside the gate) and some kind of turning point. The tracks were smaller than the trains for the Trifecta. To the right of the turning point, a track leads into a resting opening, not explored further - I couldn't move all the stones.

Just inside the gate we find a dwarf skeleton that has tried to claw its way out. A stone tablet under the arm (attaches text from all stone tablets at the bottom of the log).

To the left we find three rooms. Another sign that the dwarves who have lived here must have been really scared, remains against the wall with one arm trying to defend against….. something! A room with two beds (guard station?) and a room with a giant painting of a faceless family (which now hangs in the tavern).

Inside there lies a body that seems untouched by the ravages of time, its clothes still intact, asleep. Fiona of course strains away and starts talking to the body, which OF COURSE turns out to be some kind of sick creature, a flying tentacle head. None of us have seen anything like it! Maurice takes care of the head-being with "two tights and a bathing cap" as my mother would say.

The previously intact body now turns to dust and there we find two more stone tablets. Thank goodness Aburaguzgul knows Dwarven, because the rest of us understood nada.

Fiona could probably use some punishment, she is constantly looking to yell and talk crap at me, I think it's jealousy, but really trying to teach her about sisterhood and humanity.

The three stone tablets read as follows:

"The old ones...understood what Hrakk is planning. Their eyes are fixed...from Bulu-Kasil. I feel it...all night long...Potros hurry..."

"Has anyone emptied the treasure chambers? Missing reports from level... 3 and level... The operation is shut down. Our sword... with the flame is sent. None.... until Potros' masterpiece is finished, order from King Hrakk."

"Oh no, oh no, oh no... it scrapes... screeches... their curse... I renounce the skalds... cursed be Hrakk and his arrogance..."

Further in:

We go through a half-open gate at the end of the atmospheric corridor and there we look out over a gaping void (how long, wide and deep it is difficult to calculate, even if we tried). A small lift, attached to a chain device, is the only way forward. Unfortunately, we are no longer coming. Here we are attacked by five more of these creatures.

A scream paralyzes both me and Maurice and we are stunned, while the others fight these disgusting creatures. One of them plants something in Maurice's head, luckily I escape, thank God!

We have to spend two whole hours trying to find out what happened to Maurice. He's got a horrible curse (really exciting stuff) on him, we understand that this is going to get worse and worse by the hour. We also understand that he will eventually lose his head, haha literally, and turn into such a being himself. We see that only two things will help:

Remove curse or greater restoration.

Sunlight will stagnate and delay the transformation.

He looked really ugly, but kept his spirits up, what a hero!

We realized that time was precious and decided to seek out the priests in "Flengen"

We gallop through the wasteland and are caught up by "Roc" who first supplies himself with "Ponni" before she supplies herself with Fiona. The bird flies up to drop Fiona to certain death, while we all gallop for our lives.

Aburaguzgul sends his little mechanical gizmos to bring her back to life where she lies unconscious in the bird's giant claws, 60 feet up in the air. We were reasonably sure that Fiona's final hour had come, but by a miracle and sheer luck, she flops down and lands at the entrance to The Rift. At least that lady has, if nothing else, some good magical abilities.

Once inside we meet a lizard man on an ostrich who leads us to the priest, these people have a real thing for dwarves. Engraved on the wall in a corridor before the priests' innermost chamber, we found the text:

"You who are going to travel to the unknown

From everyone you feel close to

Feel no fear!

The ancients are not gods

The skalds in their halls will welcome us

Sail, sail, towards honor and truth!

I think there is some juicy info there - such as the fact that the old are not gods!

They help us, but say this is the only time they have a chance to reverse the curse. Maurice becomes himself again, while being strongly influenced by what the lizard priest calls "The darkest thing ever to come from Bulu-Kasil"

Recommends that the next group that tries Black Marrow has a high LEVEL and preferably a "remove curse" in their arsenal, in any case they should bet on sun and zero clouds. Not exactly easy, but we survived, against all odds. Now we deserve some downtime, so Maurice can put his cute face back on properly.