Expedition 8 - Troll Bridge

The bridge was guarded by the troll Pog. The troll behaved menacingly, but thanks to Grolsch and Tinfoyle's language skills we were able to communicate with it. Tinfoyle tricked the troll into ingesting love essence (obtained from a previous expedition), which resulted in the troll being captivated by Aburaguzgul and kidnapping her.

We followed the troll's tracks across the bridge, and discovered a trap in the middle of the bridge, a row of hidden spears. A small passage to the left seemed passable, but when Grolsch tried to send his horse through, it fell through a hidden gap. We have stretched a rope across the gap, but use it with care.

On the other side of the bridge we had a view to the next bridge, which Maurice studied more closely with his glasses. The bridge was covered in piles of armor, swords and a catapult. Could someone have tried to invade the castle that the bridges lead to? It is also possible that the guardian of the bridge has a collecting mania.

We found the troll's hiding place, which was a kind of hut built into a cliff side. The way down there was a rope ladder. The troll was still captivated by Aburaguzgul, who tried to extract information. The troll's skin was partially covered with boils/growths, and the troll believed that these boils protected him from the mist.

Due to misunderstandings and language problems, we ended up fighting the troll. Thanks to luck and the collective cleverness of the group, we managed to defeat the troll. Grolsch pushed Pog out of the hut and he was crushed against the edge of the cliff.

After a thorough investigation of the troll's home, we discovered a secret passage leading through the mountain. It seems that Pog dug the tunnel himself. Along the way we found a text that Pog had carved into the wall: POG SMARTEST, SHOULD RULE OVER THE BRIDGES UNTIL THE OLD MAN WALK AGAIN. DRET THE ONE-EYED: BIG UNSAFE BUT STRONG. BORG THE GREAT: TOXIC, HATEFUL AND MOST DANGEROUS. HOW TO KILL?????

The tunnel ended under the second bridge, the one covered in armor. Under the bridge was a complicated ropework, which Aburaguzgul decided to investigate. She pulled on the rope, and was swept along to the other side of the bridge. Soon after we could hear the horn calling us back. An even bigger troll (probably Drett or Borg) was patrolling the bridge, and we weren't sure if we had time to save Aburaguzgul.

Fortunately, Aburaguzgul managed to transport herself back into a bag of holding, which was carried by her flying assistant. We made it back to the first bridge, which was now unguarded. Foolishly, everyone except the undersigned chose to cross the gap in the bag of holding, and they said that they were attempted to be attacked by humanoid aquatic beings inside the bag.

Other details of possible interest:
- On the way to the first bridge we heard a distant sound of a sleeping creature (the creature is probably of enormous size)

- There is a large dark/grey sea monster in the fjord under the first bridge.

- There were red lights in some of the windows in the castle to which the bridges lead.

- Aburaguzgul discovered a forest of violet plants when she ended up isolated on the other side of bridge no.2. The plants exhaled a kind of pollen dust, and when she cut a plant, it sent out spores and gave her necrotic damage. Possible link between the plants and Pog's boils? She took a copy with her.