Expedition 5 - Puff is stupid

Many little people with today. Utriztur, Ignur, and the new one, Maurice.

And then a hill. Ritz.

Guzgul his horse, name: Horse, fond of name for Maurice his pony, name Pony.

Was going to kill furniture today. I was looking forward to it. Would set puff on fire.

Came to the castle along the same path.

Everything looked the same.

New armor emerged from the water out of the moat.

Ritz killed armor with an arrow. Great.

Puff emerged in the same place as last time on the top of the castle. Puff was annoying and stupid. As last time.

Maurice was playing cabinetmaker. Ritz played along. Puff was stupid and believed it. Puff is stupid.

Puff warned us about new traps he had set up. I found a bottle that was a trap that went bang when I threw it into the moat.

Puff rolled out the red carpet for the main house.

Maurice played that he had to fix the chest of drawers. Puff ran for parts and tools. Puff is gullible and stupid. We got a lot of information from them.

The bookshelves of wizarding books were emptied.

They said it has been over 1000 years since they came to life.

Master Wizard QC dreamed of other things. About the "thing" in the mountain. In the mountain crevasse. The purple light. Would be part of it. Love it. It is located in the west. Did any of the little ones say it was the flower queen?

He stopped being nice and decent when the fog came. He got weird because he got a little lost in the fog.

He sent his clever dwarf servant Yurret to the light in the west. Yurret never came back.

They also talked about Nordborgen. Maybe that's where the armor comes from?

Carpet was gone. Didn't want to say where.

While Puff was away we smashed his furniture friends. They called us furniture breakers.

They bled like living beings.

Ignur found magic stone in the killed dresser. We don't know what it can do yet.

Puff didn't come back.

We explored the rest of the first floor.

The chimney led nowhere. Just out to the roof.

Got a good overview of the entire first floor.

Many rooms and spy holes.

Puff watched us while we killed his friends. Puff is not clever, but stupid.

We found kitchen chair because it smelled bad from his kitchen. We tortured it and got a lot of information from him. In the end we crushed him in the meat grinder that he used to make disgusting mousse food for the wizard.

First we got a lot of good torture information.

Kitchen chair cooked disgusting food for the wizard.

The sorcerer not dead as they had otherwise said. But he is not well.

The wizard is called Quen.

Puff brings food to the wizard.

It is 1300 years and 15 days since the furniture came to life.

Puff would have thrown us into the grinder eventually.

Carpet had been given an important task on the second floor.

And then I put him in the meat grinder.

Kitchen chair said Puff rules over the other furniture. Or certain. Now they are broken. Just blanket and puff again.

Who's going to cook for the wizard now that we've broken the kitchen chair?

We moved on. Found a disgusting room with a lot of disgusting food.

Also found board.

This was on the board:

- Thylsdag:

Messenger arrived with bad news. The funeral postponed again. Rondo arrives late afternoon. Should he now be referred to as a Hrakk? Private meeting with Quen. Rondo leaves before sunset. No more visitors.

- Vrensdag:

Rondo back with unknown woman. New meeting with Quen. Lasts for several hours. They leave after dark. Quen asks the guards to ride ahead of them to the funeral. We plan to leave at dawn. Will Yurret stay with him?

We went back and examined several rooms.

Found 9 antique gold coins.

Utrizthur has 1 of them, guzguz has 8 of them.

There was also a room with a trap with a spear. It hurt AbuGuz.

Here dwarf skeleton. It said "forgive us, forgive us, forgive us!" on it. It had stabbed itself to death. Maurice said it was like in the wasteland. Amazing what dwarves can come up with.

There were a lot of rusty weapons in this room.

Also found a room with another dwarf skeleton that had held the nose and mouth. Maybe it's the fog that killed the little thing?

Then we finally went to the stairs.

We tried to trick it, but we didn't succeed. It disappeared again. It was something with change in stone. Ignur understood something about that. I wanted to jump. Did not succeed. Klompedomp and fell.

We walked by all the skeletons at the bottom where the stairs were and went to the end.

Could look up to light.

Foghorn began.

Maybe it was high enough up above the fog where the light was?

Triz jumped into guzguz's bag and guzguz his little flying dwarf gadget boom flew the bag open.

We waited for Triz. But flying dwarf gadget boomers came back with empty bag. We went in the bag and came up.

Here was a room with things and books. Surely emptied next time we come as the other shelves were. Boring.

The fog entered the building. Not good. We were still in the square part of the building. Not in the tower.

We jumped in the bag again and little flying dwarf flew us to horses. Here was Utritztur Baltic Sea. Strange.

We just escaped the fog. When we were home we saw that it is only the top tower that is not covered in the fog. There seems to be a long way to go.

On the horse ride on the way back, Utriztur said that he had fought with Puff, who said that we were playing with things we did not understand. Guzgul doesn't think so