Expedition 10 – Back back to the sunken castle

We arrived at the sunken castle and when we entered the area we were mentally taken aback. Some type of magic. Helmut fell unconscious. Antonio began to hallucinate. The rest did fine.

The stairs at the entrance were frozen. A bit difficult to get down.

Inside the castle. There were traces of battle from the previous expeditions. We continued into a large room (the one on the left). There was a staircase with a carpet. As soon as Ignur and Helmut stepped on the carpet, the stairs disappeared. They fell down. Struck a little. Was attacked by a black blob but we chopped it before it could attack. You must remember to hold on to the handrail when walking on the stairs. Perhaps this is in an earlier chronicle as well.

There was a hole in the floor that led down to a large room. At the bottom, a creepy lady lay in a coffin and screamed. We were just about to be mentally taken aback again.

While the others rested, Dwyghte, Antonio, and Test1 (Helmut's robotic gizmo with existential angst) entered a passageway. Met a ghost. Cool guy. He told her that the creepy lady was the princess Dimra Hrakk. She had been abandoned by Rondo, who was to marry her. He was to be crowned Hrakk, but he ran off with a maid. There is an old gnomic saying which reads: Don't hate the player. But most people around here seem to do it anyway. The ghost said that he himself could not be at peace until Rondo returned and took responsibility or that another worthy was crowned in his place. Right now the line of succession is broken.

Back in the room with the resting ones. We entered a crevice in a pile of stones which had apparently fallen together. Come to the ground for once. It was a bit of a challenge to get down there without getting hit. Triz transformed into a mountain goat and carried Dwyghte down. Or she didn't carry him that far. She lost him. The rest of us crawled down a rope.

At the bottom we had to crawl through a narrow crack in the ground. Some were a little nervous and wanted to go back. Antonio played a bit of smooth jazz and then it went much easier. Until we were attacked by two skeletons. But we managed them.

On the other side we camped and rested. Afterwards, we entered through a large silver door. You had to bow to enter. Some acid dripped on Ignur's toe and did a little damage.

We were now in the room with the creepy lady aka Dimra Hrakk aka Princess Problematic. We fought her and a ghost and a skeleton. Killed them all. When the princess died, a lot of the mysterious mist poured out of her corpse. She seemed happy to die. As if she had waited a long time for it. Ignur got her crown.

On her coffin was written:

Wise princess Dimra Hrakk rests here

The magician that the infidels feared

Her skills as an apprentice widely renowned

When our greatest moment came

By her brother's side in Kuld-Norogh she fell

We heard a voice from above. It was Maurice who had come to pick us up. He had warm jackets with him. There had been a storm outside in the meantime.

When we left the castle we met Ignur's father. Cool guy. He told us to go south again. Leave Stormfyord and never return. He also said that stone is stone. Then he was carried away by a gigantic being. About 10 meters high. Cool guy.

Then we rode home.