Life at Stone-upon-hill
EDIT

The Citadel seen from the south, on the approach from the Belching Wastes.

Stone-upon-hill is the end of the Line, and the Trifecta Line Companies' forward operating base for Expeditions in Stormfyord.

In September of the year 50 PT the Trifecta Line Company issued a call for recruits throughout all of Kazar. Daring souls who wished to ride the Steam Singers to the very edge of the known world. To risk their lives in discovering what lay beyond the fog covered lands of Stormfyord.

This section is dedicated to acquainting would-be travellers with the ancient citadel.


Contents
1	Expeditions
1.1	Gameplay
1.2	Express Decontamination
1.3	Downtime
1.4	Levelling up
1.5	Crafting
1.6	Loyal Steed
1.7	Death in Kazar
1.8	DM'ing in Kazar
2	Inhabitants of Stone-upon-hill
2.1	The Watcher
2.2	The Guildsman
2.3	The Officer
2.4	The Tavern-keep
2.5	The Keeper of Chronicles
3	Places of interest
3.1	The Tavern
3.2	The Bazaar
3.3	The Chroniclers tower
3.4	Station house
3.5	Northern Drawbridge
3.6	Central Plaza
Expeditions

Sasha Yarna, Officer of the Line and head of security at Stone-Upon-hill. You'll have to speak to her to get an Expedition going


Stone-upon-hill facing Stormfyord - painter Ezeke Van Klemt, University of Zil ‘a Zan - 39 PT

A glorious new project begun in the year of 50 PT, Expeditions are forays into the unknown wilds of Stormfyord.

The Trifecta Line Company has a singular goal in mind: To connect the Line to the very northernmost reaches of Kazar. Despite many attempts, work has finally ground to a halt on the Line, the fog in Stormfyord proving too great an obstacle. Instead volunteers have been summoned from all over Kazar to investigate the region.

The lucky few granted a one-way ticket to Stone-upon-hill are encouraged to venture out when they have a target in mind, as well as a fellowship formed with other employees. As the fog only recedes once a week there is plenty of time to prepare. To avoid risking the entire workforce a maximum of five riders are sent out at any one time.

As enforced by the Watcher, a group returning from an Expedition is to be quarantined for a week, to ensure no symptoms emerge from exposure to the fog in the valley. What these symptoms are, however, few know. In the meantime other groups gather, ensuring there is always an Expedition raring to go.

But after a week has passed one is back in rotation. Ready for glorious discovery!

Gameplay
Expeditions are single session forays into the Stormfyord. A group elects a destination and a date prior to playing. When they eventually retreat at the end of the session, the fog returns to cover the valley. Between each individual session one week passes in-game. So, if you are in decontamination, you are forced to sit out at least one session before being able to return to Stormfyord.

Every member of an Expedition is paid 75 gold. The Chronicler is paid an additional 50 gold.

Express Decontamination
If it is impossible to fully staff an Expedition with the available characters it is possible to enact Express Decontamination. The character in question foregoes their 7 days of downtime and is immediately prepared for departure. This is only possible if all available players have declined to play.

Downtime
Every session played moves the story 7 days forward. It is possible for your character to keep themselves busy during this time. Activities can not generate gold unless agreed upon with the DM.

A character in decontamination is automatically granted 14 days downtime.

Levelling up
The only way to become stronger is to explore the Stormfyord with your allies: Experience point guide.

Crafting
Using your downtime to create new useful items for yourself and your allies is a worthwhile pursuit, if you have the talent and the materials required. Kazar has its own guide: Crafting guide.

Loyal Steed
You can spend your downtime connecting with your steed. Make an Animal Handling check. If it exceeds 13 your steed receives a loyalty point. The more points the greater chance it will intuitively understand and obey your wishes.

The DC increases by 1 per loyalty point. Example: Your steed has 1 loyalty point from a previous success. To increase it to 2 loyalty points the DC is 14.

Death in Kazar
There is high risk involved when setting out on an Expedition. If your character should perish you can create a new one with the same amount of experience points as the group average. This should be seen as an incentive to ensure that no player falls too far behind. Or you can elect to leave the Kazar campaign, opening up a slot for new players to join.

DM'ing in Kazar
The Expedition format allows for other Dungeon Master's to try their hand at guiding a party on an adventure: Kazar Co-DM Guide

ADVERTISEMENT
Inhabitants of Stone-upon-hill
The Watcher

Darryl Cede

Once every week, for only a few hours, the blueish fog recedes from the valleys of Stormfyord, allowing brave adventurers to venture forth on an Expedition. Essential to this operation is The Watcher. A half-elf in his mid-thirties, he goes by the name of Darryl Cede. A dour man of few words, his eyeless face terribly scarred. Often seen standing on the northern wall, he can tell hours in advance when the path will open. And when the fog begins to seep back into the vale he sounds the Deephorn, calling any still alive home.

Essential to scheduling Expeditions, ensuring safe travel in Stormfyord.

The Guildsman

Timian Pestle

Wherever there is gold, there is trade. The well connected halfling Timian Pestle ensures a constant flow of goods to-and-fro the isolated fortress. He has never been seen without a smile on his face, his eyes perfectly round and slightly unnerving. Dressed in archaic fashions which reflects his peoples' ancient ties to Chytyr, he is well spoken and polite. He often invites his colleagues to visit, who in turn bring with them valuable merchandise, entertaining them in his vast hall.

Trades common resources with the workers of the Line, imports valuable goods and is always interested in purchasing items of value.

The Officer

Sasha Yarna

A station in name, if not in appearance, Stone-upon-hill is guarded by an Officer of the Line. Certified by the Trifectian Magi as a sorcerer, the strict human Sasha Yarna commands the fifty soldiers permanently stationed at the citadel, ensuring all visitors abide by the laws. Rumoured to have led some of the first expeditions into the Stormfyord, her blonde hair is streaked with gray, her age a mystery. Her left leg replaced by a mechanical contraption which limits her movement. She provides intel on locations of interest to the brave souls embarking on Expeditions.

Provides intel on areas of interest, confirms groups for Expeditions, ensures the peace is kept.

The Tavern-keep

Zagog

No expedition can be successful without a well fed worker. The ancient and obsessive half-orc Zagog ensures that only the finest dining is available to the weary workers and soldiers at Stone-upon-hill. Her kitchen staff consists of a trio of young dwarves who scurry about as she shouts and curses, wheeling herself around in a steam-powered chair. The true reason for her employment is her aptitude for the brewing of alcohol. An artificer by trade, she is rumoured to have studied amongst the gnomes, perfecting a particular brand of mulled mead - Glaagg.

The Keeper of Chronicles

Glory

Asides from the Watcher, no-one holds a higher status than the Keeper of Chronicles. A young tiefling said to have escaped persecution in Vergwenwell, Glory is a savant, capable of reciting every single word she has read in her life. She is entrusted with compiling and safe-guarding all chronicles written by the Expeditions, reporting their findings to the Trifecta.

Reads and stores all knowledge, ensures the Chronicler is paid 50 gold for every report.

Places of interest
Stone-upon-hill is perched high above the volcanic wastes below, its ancient walls built upon the foundations of the mountain below it. The architecture is foreign to all who visit, as there are no markings or inscriptions of any sorts within its labyrinthian corridors. For while the entirety of the citadel has been explored, only the uppermost quarters are in use. Adventurers in the employ of the Trifecta Line Company are given their own rooms, simply furnished with a bed, a wardrobe and a heated sink and tub. Steam drawn from the depths of the mountain ensures a comfortable heated floor, with windows facing northward, towards the Stormfyord.

The Tavern
Run by Zagog and her dwarven cooks, the tavern is a wide hall below the last standing tower, devoid of windows. Lit by scented candles, steamy mugs of Glaag served to every table. The fireplace always lit, logs crackling. All meals are enjoyed in the tavern, provided free of charge to all contract workers. Many spend their days off reading in one of the many comfy chairs, or playing cards with other adventurers. A place to share the latest gossip and daydream of home.

DISCORD: The Tavern channel serves as a general chat room where adventurers are free to discuss whatever is on their minds. But if you make too much noise Zagog might come wheeling by to tell you off.

The Bazaar

Well decorated and full of wonders, the Bazaar is worth a visit for any adventurer

Timian Pestle's domain, situated on the southern tip of the citadel, the Bazaar is an ancient hall which faintly resembles a church. Its walls are bedecked with wonderful artworks and paintings from Pestle's private collection. Elegant silks and fabrics cover the windows, casting a multicoloured light across the chamber. Timian himself resides in an adjoining chamber, where he often entertains merchant colleagues who have travelled to satisfy their curiosity of this distant region. Others come to trade with the workers themselves, hoping to curry favour with the Trifecta by peddling goods to the frontier.

DISCORD: All purchases are to be registered in the Bazaar. Trade with Timian Pestle is automatic, as he can sell any item from the Player's handbook. He is a shrewd trader, always looking for a good deal. He can buy used inventory items for half their original value.

The Chroniclers tower
Of the four towers believed once to have perched upon each corner of the battlements, only one remains. A winding stair leads to a circular study overflowing with ancient texts and modern books. Here Chronicles are promptly delivered to Glory, who records them for distribution. Seldom does Glory leave her room, preferring for the dwarven cooks to deliver her food to her heated chambers. Visitors are forced to take off their shoes, as is written in seventeen languages on the door to the tower.

DISCORD: Chronicles are to be posted here when finished. Discussion and questions are to be made in the created thread.

Station house
Official name for the small wooden building situated near the Northern Drawbridge. Built by Sasha herself, it is quite the contrast to the ancient stone surrounding it. Inside is a wide marble desk, procured from the depths of the citadel, upon which all schedules are worked out. Her mechanical leg hindering her from riding out herself, Sasha busies herself with assembling efficient Expeditionary Squads. She regularily interviews workers, cross referencing their skills with the locations described by the Chronicler.

DISCORD: Channel for scheduling Expeditions. Sasha can be consulted for advice as to where to explore next, but her knowledge is limited by that of the Chronicler.

Northern Drawbridge

The view from the Northern Drawbridge is breathtaking

Connecting the citadel to the sloping valley of the Stormfyord, the view from the Northern Drawbridge is breathtaking. Verdant green hills tinted by the blue light from the fog. Here stands the Watcher, Darryl Cede, his sightless eyes gazing ever outwards. A stable filled with the finest horses of the realm is situated just by the gate. Riding down the hill towards the valley on an Expedition, the horses galloping at break neck speed to destinations yet unknown, is said to be a thrill unlike any other.

All Expeditions begin and end here. Except, of course, those who never return from the wilds.

Central Plaza
The main connecting hub of Stone-upon-hill. A bulletin board hangs near the entrance to the tavern, where newspaper clippings from the capitol are carefully curated by the Officers of the Line.

DISCORD: As time passes in Kazar new information regarding the state of the world will be displayed in the plaza channel.