Pantheon of Kazar
EDIT
The Trifecta believe in a secular state, factories built on ancient holy sites, disregarding the customs which predated the rise of this new civilisation. But this attitude alone is not enough to rid the people of Kazar of their ancient customs and beliefs.


Contents
Genesis & Modern worship

The progenitor gods create Kazar - painter Ezeke Van Klemt, University of Zil ‘a Zan - 14 PT

Although the creation of the realm is usually attributed to Ceihír (Flamefather), Sruth (Roar of Water) and Anam (Dreamer), the progenitor Gods, rarely are these worshipped in name, as they are known to have abandoned the world in its youth and their tales are mostly lost to ancient myth.

The Chorus (The Nine Bards of Anam) are considered by most to have awoken the world, teaching the inhabitants their ways. Their departure, a tragedy known as the Betrayal, occurred when Yakkavad gave life to the Tieflings.

In addition to the Chorus exists the worship of the Dark Prince and the Smiling God, problematic beliefs which are widely shunned.

Each deity represents one of the alignment choices you as a player has.

ADVERTISEMENT
Lawful Good – The Sisters Za – The Truespoken
Gods of Honesty, believed to be three sisters who all speak and sing in tune. Their followers believe honesty in all things the greatest of virtues. Paladins and Clerics often follow their teachings.

Neutral Good – Hildegard – The Lifebringer
Waker of the world, God of the new-born and God of death, Hildegard was said to have ascribed every beings’ number of days.  All who believe in joining the chorus after their death pray to Hildegard, making her the most popular of the Gods.

Chaotic Good – Jeroule – The Whimsical  
A god who never plays in tune with others, but who creates beautiful harmonies that complement the others. Believed to be the God of independence and free spirit. Many of his tales involve his chaotic nature bringing happiness to others by accident.

Lawful Neutral - Sublatti the Slayer – Bane of Yakkavad/The All-Judge

Sublatti the Slayer defeats Yakkavad - Painted by First Judge Jada Cowl in 80 BT

God of justice, believed to have slain Yakkavad when he attempted to break from the chorus of the world. She is said to deliver divine judgement without mercy. Her symbol is emblazoned upon every court of law in Kazar. Many warriors ask her for guidance before battle.

Neutral – Ramish – The Wavesinger
God of sea and wind, a deep voice which seldom heeds the needs or woes of the sailors who pray to him. An introverted God who never opens his eyes to his own actions. Some theologians consider his and Vallaka’s parts similar to those of the progenitor gods Sruth and Ceihír – leading many to question if their existence is due to a mistranslation.

Chaotic Neutral – Vallaka - The Flamecaller

Bronze likeness of Vallaka the Flamecaller, official emblem of the Trifecta Line Company

Believed to have tamed the fires, but let them run free when Ramish refused her romantic advances. A volatile trickster who might as soon kill you as spare your life. She is considered the mother of all steam; her likeness is often engraved upon Steam Singers on the Line. As with Ramish, certain scholars believe her to be a continuation or mistranslation of Ceihír,

Lawful Evil – Cult of the Dark Prince
Worshippers of ambition, who follow ancient texts referring to a victory over the ancient Gods by the Auburn Prince. Considered heretics for proclaiming the Gods as having been slain long ago.

Neutral Evil – Yakkavad the Betrayer/The True Singer
Rebellious God who wished to create in his own image. Where the other Gods created in order, he sung into being the tieflings, in worship of a dark image known only to him. Slain by Sublatti.

Chaotic Evil – Church of The Smiling God

Banned painting depicting the Smiling God, seized by the Northbound Guard from a burnt church - the priest who painted it had apparently lit himself on fire

Believers who worship the coming of the darkness, a sundering of all worlds. They believe the promised end of all of existence absolves them of their morality, the carnal pleasures of man all that matters. A controversial yet popular church in the secular capitol.