Regions and places in Kazar
EDIT
The following tome contains information regarding the geographical, cultural and political climate in the many places and regions connected by the Line.


Contents
1	Arc-upon-High
2	Gulf of Kazar
3	Soskni; The Burning City
3.1	Factions in Soskni
4	The Line
4.1	Factions on the Line
5	Groves of Yonder
6	Fyrrum
7	Belching Wastes
8	Stone-upon-Hill
9	Stormfyord
Arc-upon-High

Arc-upon-high, seat of the Trifecta, prior to the building of the glass bridge to the mainland

Arc-upon-High, the seat of the Trifecta, lies to the south of Soskni in the Gulf of Kazar. A mountainous castle of glass which stretches out onto the sea and into the sky in the far south. The three dominant races of the world are united under their rule.

ADVERTISEMENT
Gulf of Kazar
A massive tear on the southern tip of the peninsula, where the submarine volcano Vallaka's Maw tore the earth asunder. In its midst sits Arc-upon-high, a divine sight any sailor will remember until the end of his days.

Soskni; The Burning City

The burning city of Soskni, facing Arc-upon-high

Capitol of the Trifectum, and a technological marvel without equal in the known world. Beneath the black rock of its foundation, lava burns day and night. After decades of experimentation, the Trifecta succeeded in harnessing this volatile energy, granting the city of Soskni its most vital resource: Steam. Steam powers everything. Vehicles, factories, heating – it changed the lives of the inhabitants and so unified the people of the world that the Trifecta has since seen no challenger to its rule.

The lesser nations of the south send their trading vessels to gawp at the might of the Trifecta, many hoping to steal the secrets of their technology. None so far have succeeded in challenging the might of the Secret Police, The D’Yavol!

Originally these shores were largely ignored by the people of the continent, until humans, halflings and gnomes from the south landed upon the peninsula hundreds of years ago, turning it into a bustling port of trade. Blocked from passage to the north by the Groves of Yonder, the sea treacherous alongside the coasts, the humans and halflings settled the tip of the land instead. Rich merchants voted and elected Overseers to run the local militia and control taxation of the city council, a title which later became the office of the President-Elect under the unification of the Trifecta.

Factions in Soskni
The D'Yavol
The Trifectian Magi
The Northbound Guard
River of Gold
Trifecta Line Company
Tamburn School of Sophisticated Elven Magi
Zil ‘a Zan
The Line

Rough map of the state of the Line, approved by the Trifecta - 14.08.50 PT.

A track of welded iron, which stretches from Arc-upon-High, past the Groves of Yonder, winds its way through the Fyrrum mountains and passes through the Belching Waste before stopping at Stone-upon-Hill; the ancient citadel which marks the edge of the Trifecta’s domain. Upon its rails ride the pride of the Trifecta, the Steam singers. Alongside the many stations exist the settlements of all beings of Kazar.

Factions on the Line
Trifecta Line Company
Officers of the Line
Groves of Yonder

The Line winds its way through the Groves of Yonder. Fyrrum visible to the north.

Ancient domain of the Wood-elves, a rich forest which blankets the mainland. Divided in two by the Line, and the settlements that follow it. Despite a considerable population in that central part of the region, much of the forest is left to its own. This due to an ancient agreement between King Efrael and the woodland spirits - The Yonderli, who begrudgingly accepted the Line, and the industry that followed, in their realm.

Fyrrum

A Steam Singer stops at a station near Fyrrum

As the great, green woodlands give way to sloping hills, the mountains of Fyrrum rise to meet travellers onboard the Line. Home to the dwarves, who burrow through its roots like mice through a chunk of cheese. A constant war zone, though politically very hush-hush, the different dwarven dukes constantly fight it out in the Underdark, waging proxy wars via hired mercenaries, such as hobgoblins and half-orcs of their own creation. The mines less plentiful than they tell the outside world, the demand enormous from the ever-growing capitol in the south, while the wealth of the mountain is increasingly redirected towards internal warfare. Enormous debts are owed to the River of Gold in Soskni. Most dwarven dukes are bankrupt, desperately hoping to wipe out their rivals in time to repay their debts.

Belching Wastes

The Belching Wastes

As one descends from Fyrrum, the volcanic nature of the continent can no longer be denied. Gaping craters, rising steam and volatile geysers – the Belching Waste smells as bad as it sounds. Home to the hardier and pluckier, it’s more of a no man’s land, with bandits often assailing the Line, causing constant headaches for the Officers of the Trifecta. The surrounding sea creeps in close, the jagged peaks formed by submarine volcanoes making the ocean lethal. No ships can make it to the other side of the continent!

In this lethal and precarious region, gnomes make their home. They arrived long before the humans, and thirsting for knowledge, journeyed north along the continent, few surviving the hostility of the elves and dwarves. Their discoveries below the Belching Wastes predate the human steam inventions, but were hidden from outside eyes. While the Trifecta covet their Steam singers and ships, the gnomes take pleasure in electricity and true comfort in their homes beneath the earth, staying out of sight and out of mind.

Stone-upon-Hill

The ancient citadel of Stone-upon-hill, seen from the southern approach

The end of the Line. A war-torn Citadel of uncertain origin, almost destroyed in some unnamed calamity. The very edge of known civilisation, at the border of the Stormfyord. A massive rockface shields the frontier settlement from the worst of the wild storms that dominate the untameable region.

But the march of the steam engines and their masters know no restrictions. To fully connect the continent from coast to coast: the grandest of all goals!

Life at Stone-upon-hill
Stormfyord

View of Stormfyord from the Watcher's Perch on Stone-upon-hill. Most of the land covered in fog.

The place of adventure! Merciless storms batter the frontier settlement, followed by a dark, mysterious fog – deadly to those caught in its tendrils.

What truths lie in the icy north? To build the Line one must establish safe footholds within the Stormfyord, creating a path for the Trifecta!

Expedition sites in Stormfyord