Setting primer
EDIT
Kazar is a steampunk fantasy setting with a touch of western thrown in for good measure.

This wiki serves as a reference point for the well known history of Kazar, and its contents are all written in the high language of Gnomish, so as to best integrate with the existing rulebooks of Dungeons & Dragons. Chronicles can be freely written in Common.

Technology and fashion are evolving rapidly, introducing all sorts of new quirks for your Dungeons & Dragons character. But while firearms are in the process of being invented, considered by many more of a risk to the user than the target, they have yet to replace the more conventional weapons such as swords and bows.

Here are a few things to keep in mind when you start creating your character in the Kazar setting:


Contents
1	Calendar
2	Race
3	Class
4	Magic
5	Cosmetics
6	Experience points
7	Background
8	Theology
9	Exclusions
Calendar
Following the ascension of the Trifecta a new calendar was established. There was now to be Before Trifecta (BT) and Post Trifecta (PT). Our story begins in the year 50 Post Trifecta, with the call for Expeditions.

Race
Some of the races in Kazar differ slightly from their descriptions in the Player's Handbook. Be sure to consult the People of Kazar page for inspiration.

Class
All class options published by Wizards of the Coast are available. No Unearthed Arcana.

Magic
All forms of magic are strictly regulated by the Trifecta. Strict laws issued by the Trifectian Magi limit all magic users to a certain spell level and amounts of uses. This constitutes the "spell slot" gameplay aspect of Dungeons & Dragons. Upon achieving higher levels you are slowly being permitted by the Trifectian Magi to learn and use more powerful spells (represented by numbered patches worn on your outer jacket). Spell slots are therefore not limited in the same way, but breaking the law could have terrible consequences.

Cosmetics
Although swords and bows still make up the bulk of the kind of weapons you can wield, feel free to embellish their designs with mechanical cosmetics. Perhaps the crossbow has a steam powered reload function? The sword a retracting hilt? Cosmetic details will help your character stand out in a steampunk fantasy world.

Experience points
Experience points work in a different manner in Kazar. Learn more here: Experience point guide

Background
There are several custom backgrounds tailored to suit the setting, for those who want their characters to feel even more attuned to the world at large. Read more about their benefits here:

Line Worker
Inventor
Treesinger
Child of Industry
Theology
Kazar is independent from the Forgotten Realms and none of the deities mentioned in the Player's Handbook apply when creating a character. If you require a deity for your Paladin or Cleric, select one from the Pantheon of Kazar.

Exclusions
Drow do not exist, and therefore are not a playable race in Kazar. Unless specifically requested, the only races available for play are those included in the Player's Handbook.