Politics and Laws of the Trifecta
EDIT

Contents
1	The Trifecta
2	Government and election
3	Intellectual thought
4	Soldiery and Peacekeeping
5	Magic
6	Religion and Church
The Trifecta

Symbol of the Trifectum. The fourth stone represents the unification of Kazar.

The Trifecta is the name of the ruling body of the Trifectum, which encompasses the entire northern landmass of Kazar. Having seized complete control over the continent, started a new calendar and forever revolutionized the industry of this world - they are a force to be reckoned with. Their castle is one of glass, situated in the Gulf of Kazar, known as Arc-upon-high. Only the most loyal and trustworthy servants, advisors and chief engineers are allowed within these hallowed halls.

ADVERTISEMENT
Government and election

Insignia of King Efrael

While the Trifecta rules with absolute authority, the once separate nations all influence it in different ways.

Efrael, as king of the elves and a being of immortal life, reigns supreme, his son Calder forever waiting for his father to step down.

Burghoul the Wide, the most powerful duke amongst the dwarves, holds the office through covert war and terror in his homeland of Fyrrum. This is common knowledge but not a single dwarf will admit to this fact.


Insignia of Burghoul the Wide


Family crest of De Floc family

Humans meanwhile represent the only group where there has been a change of leadership. The first President-Elect to rise alongside the Trifecta was named Garold Lawson. He was an old and experienced merchant, much loved by the people. He held the office for four consecutive terms before passing away under mysterious circumstances. The indomitable Morgana de Floc rose to power, now in her seventh term in office. Feared by all the merchants, and believed by the common people to have assassinated Lawson. One term lasts for five years, as ruled by the merchants back when the position was called Overseer.

For while the Trifecta through their military show a united front, each representative works hard to secure the best conditions for their own people.

Intellectual thought
While all critics of the Trifecta are immediately silenced (not that any would dare either way) intellectual thought and learning is widely encouraged in Soskni. Several universities vie for the cleverest students, learning available to those who are able to bypass the gruelling tests required to attend them. Zil ‘a Zan being the most powerful of these universities, its engineers the finest on the Line.  

Soldiery and Peacekeeping
The first law written by the Trifecta upon their ascension was that every standing regiment was to have officers representing all three nations, as protection against attempts at a coup d'état. The result has been a standing militia uniquely devoid of any racial conflict. A symbol of pride for the entire nation. The chief regiment is known as the Northbound Guard, with several off-shoots across Kazar specializing in different areas of military expertise. Most famous of these are Officers of the Line, who work for Trifecta Line Company.

All units are required to dress in the armour of the Trifecta, light leather and polished breastplates, their colours a deep blood red. Bands of white ribbons on their right arm designating rank. Only members of the secret police, the D’Yavol are allowed to choose their own dress. And none know what the secret police look like anyway.

Despite their navy being more powerful than their neighbours, the Trifecta have not used their army for anything other than peacekeeping, despite Fuhdain and Vergenwell vying for their allegiance in combating the other.

Magic

Markings designating the bearer as a level 3 wizard and level 1 bard

Believed to be related to mysticism and old superstition. Feared by the Trifecta and therefore strictly regulated. Those who practice it are forced to wear bands marking their level of power, which in turn require them to report to the Trifectian Magi; mages who mercilessly hunt down any rogue magic users in the realm. These report directly to the secret police, who in turn despise magic in all its forms. The only exemption is the druidic magic practiced by the elves in the Groves of Yonder, despite the Trifectian Magi lobbying for control of the region.

Religion and Church
For a long time the people of Kazar held onto separate beliefs, similar in origin, but widely different in practice. Under the Trifecta science and engineering has become almost a dominant religion, with the Trifecta believing in a secular state. This ideal causes some rancour, as churches are forced to fund themselves, often being driven out of the more popular districts by newly built factories. But even in a world dominated by dwarven steel and iron, belief holds great meaning for many. Loneliness and a need for community is a driving reason why many end up abandoning Soskni in favour of work on the Line.