Expedition 1 – Vale of Blossoms

Arrived at large rock formation with tall dark crack. Discovered dead dwarf outside. Carried amulet with Dwarfish runes of unknown dialect, letter C. Heart appeared stopped, approx. dead less than 24h.

Crack lights up purple when touched, barrier of light, riddle in unknown language (not Common, Elvish, Dwarfish, Gnomish, Abyssal, Undercommon). Used spell to decipher. Riddle’s solution: Love. Barrier disappeared. Apparently source of strange light.

Entered crack, horses unable to follow. Inside: Dark void, bridge of purple light. Gate guarded by strange quicksilvery creatures. Want to hear us praise love to pass.

Past gate: Rock formation, climbing past reveals forest + valley. Unnatural colors of both valley + people. Farmstead to the left, small village to the right. In the middle: Crystal palace, home to “Blossom Queen”.

Large flower plays music in whole valley. Seems to harmonize when playing other music (Antionio’s saxophone).

Ambushed by tiny hands in forest, disposed of them. Talked to strange colored people in village. Praises Queen. Careful: They will attempt to charm your mind. Take precautions.

Spoke with Queen, asked to find + kill shadow creature previously locked in farmstead. Promised rewards.

Investigated farmstead. Creature’s chains burst by some magic. No traces. Timou offered water by farmhand. Charmed him somehow. Do not drink.

Talked to fisherman named Bronn at edge of void. Distrustful, sad. Seems to care for shadow creature. Snella stole bell from his house.

Rung bell in forest, creature appeared. Thinking it would be fed. Attempted to calm creature by petting + smooth jazz. Nearly worked, but pet too hard. Had to kill it. When killed: appeared to be dwarf found outside. Last word: “Quen” (the queen?).

Queen appears pleased, is ready to take another lover. Dwarf her previous concubine? Wants one to stay with her for two weeks to give reward. Will not take no for answer. Timou agreed to stay. Must send expedition to get him in two weeks.

Queen very angry at Antonio for playing saxophone w/ flower. Accuses instrument of being evil / filled w/ longing. Antionio barred from entry to valley. DO NOT BRING HIM NEXT EXPEDITION.

Important: Strange magic makes place look normal if not careful. Inhabitants smiling, charmed or hiding something. Fisherman + farmsteaders have reservations against treatment of shadow creature / dwarf. Accuse us of having picked sides. Not willing to talk more.

Also: Look into fountain in middle of plaza. Water lights up blue, orange, yellow, green. Possible source of charming, along w/ singing flower. Will submit for testing. UPDATE: Orange water enchanted with Intensify Emotions spell.

At entrance, found previous dwarf corpse turned to bones. Also: Timou’s body, looking dead. Snella’s crow explains our bodies also appeared dead while inside. Timou clearly NOT REALLY DEAD. Do not bury.