Expedition 4 - Return to the Valley of Flowers

As agreed during expedition #1, the Trifectan soldiers leave their man Grolsch behind enemy lines in the Valley of Flowers. He stays behind with the (so far) unnamed Queen of Flowers for two weeks. She apparently holds special interest in the dwarven kind? Speaks much about love, and some about her previous dwarf consort –killed by the swift hands of the Trifecta during expedition #1. Was character of great import in the area, or sometime in the past? Implied to expedition party that “Quen” was possible name of Queen. Flower Queen perhaps also character of great import to region in the past. Passing of time in this realm/land is highly unclear, especially to its inhabitants. Have been here for “all time”?

Flowers.png
During his stay, Grolsch learns of some lower levels beyond and under Queen’s castle. Sees great opportunity in making floating valley dimension a Trifectan outpost in future. However, as will be seen, this plan is foiled for the time being. As agreed as payment for his prolonged stay in Valley, our man Grolsch is gifted a reward: A golden “Sword of Love”. It is soon after deftly be employed as an instrument of the Trifectan cause. The Queen’s starts to imply that two weeks company is not enough, and not enough people. It becomes increasingly clear Queen will try and force entire expedition party to stay in “Valley of Flowers” and “love forever”. Her motivations thus highly suspicious and unclear.

Our Grolsch man clevery realises her ploy: Queen is smartly outmanoeuvred in the planning of a “party” for the return of the Trifectan soldiers. Traps, tools and tricks are laid for them to use in the coming inevitable fight/takeover/escape. Trifectan expedition party return to Valley as planned, bar noisy saxophonist. Grolsch cleverly orchestrates the “welcoming party”, in which gifts are given by the Queen. Local fisherman, serving the dinner, was meanwhile convinced by our comrades to put blue liquid in fish for Queen: Apparently the coloured liquids represent facets of the Queen. So too are the Valley’s inhabitants’ facets of the Queen’s persona: Regret, anger, sadness? Queen apparently clings only to love/joy, suppressing all else into these living(?) personas in village. Flower Queen ingests blue liquid through served fish. Has limited effect. Is however filled with intense regret/sadness, and through this also great distraught. Calls angrily out for the culprit: Local fisherman is named and detained, while Trifectan part is sent to Queen’s castle, for safekeeping.

The party breaks formation and ends the charade/farce – attacks green-faceted children/family, filling their bellies with blue liquid in fountain. Children undisciplined and clearly unfit for combat. They are swiftly dealt with/exposed to effective torture. Parent’s whiny, feigning real individuals. We slaughter children/constructs, bellies full of blue liquid. This harms queen, colouring her skin and further weakening her composure.

Queen becomes furious, and our Trifectan Company handily dispatch of more Queen Constructs nearby. Queen is mocked for obvious weakness, as we shout her apparent name “Quen”. Queen rambles about having been left/left behind by someone. However, when Queen’s weak morale has worn down, she says she is not actually this “Quen”. Apparently “Quen” is some master/husband/friend/colleague who she holds anger towards. However, “Quen” is NOT character who left her behind and caused intense sadness.

Perhaps Queen of Love was not loved.

In the fray of combat, weak-willed blue fisherman-construct is convinced to kill himself for our Great Trifectan Cause. This further enhances Flower Queen’s weakness. Eventually, she implodes(?) through her sadness, bringing down pandemonium on Flower Realm. It’s origin: Below Queen’s castle. Some other powerful creature is awoken. Probably creature monster is real manifestation of her rage/fury. Pandemonium quickly destroys Valley of Flowers, leaving it an inferno. The Trifectan party bravely escapes, leaving behind a broken realm. Probably, Queen’s entity of rage now resides in realm, possibly possessing great powers. This makes realm, at present, unfit for a Trifectan Forward Operating Base, at no fault of the expedition party.

Unclear if awoken rage entity has ability to escape/leave realm. Future scouts should investigate with caution. Further, changes in light emitting from mountain in future should be considered a possible great danger. Enter with great caution – probably best when more knowledge of area and this “Quen” is gathered.

Written by Timou Grolsch, Keeper of the Sword of Love, Proud Rail Worker, Loyal servant of The Trifecta.