Expedition 9 – Return to the Sunken Castle

We rode in the snow and kept warm because the great jackets we bought before we left.
It actually went pretty well when we entered the magic circle that surrounds the area around the castle, but SOMEONE (I won't say who, it's a bit poorly done) started babbling and saying lots of weird words, and one started laughing a little too a lot. But it passed, so it's going well.
We killed everything that was left in the castle (except where we haven't explored yet)
We talked to the ghost (he's not mean, just very, very disappointed in Rondo stealing the franchise, whatever that means). He probably needs a little more persuasion before he tells us who he is and what he knows. And is it a he? Maybe it's a female.
We killed the dwarf king who owned the castle! He was big and nasty with lots of boils, and fog came out of him when he was cut open. It hurt a bit, but I'm fine.
We got home safely without stress!
This is what we found out along the way:

The castle is called Hrakk and the dwarf king is called the same (the one we killed)
The dwarf king thanked us when he died, I don't know why. But probably not so pleasant to have lots of boils and live alone in a castle with lots of "living" skeletons.
Everything in the castle is essentially dead, but the fog keeps things alive?
There's one place in the castle we didn't get to explore: it's a hole in the ground guarded by a nasty slimy black thing. From the depths a woman could be heard screaming. Very disgusting.
There is fungus on the walls in some places - it swallows fire and freezes people to ice - BEWARE! Winter jackets do NOT help!
We found some things that had things written on them:

On a stone tablet by a dead lighthouse it was written:

“The ceremonies...(??) ended. We have given the key to F... to Q... Carellon, as there is no precedent for ...(?). Didn't want anyone to see what we were doing there...”

On the grave of the dwarf king (I think it was the grave) it was written:

Here rests brave prince Vondur Hrakk He who fought with weapon in hand In such a way that no enemy could stand But now he is gone, and our hearts mourn He was a hero, a dwarf prince

To get to the unexplored part with that hole in the ground:

go straight ahead at the first intersection, then eeehhh a little further ahead, and when you get to the two doors, go into the door on the left! We opened it with a key we found on a skeleton in the door on the right.

Thanks for the trip, you guys! Great people and great nature (outside the castle)! And remember: Communication is key!