Expedition 3 - The Wasteland
Objective - investigate the wasteland where previous expeditions have returned with non-descript fear.

2+ hours of easy riding through forest to destination, no surprises. We arrive at the wasteland, a large round area covered in blue heather, the heather is similar to that in the forest and appears normal upon further inspection. The distinction between the wasteland and the forest is sharp and seems artificial. When we entered the wasteland, certain members (probably those with the weakest psyche) were affected by various magical effects; Figma was eating dirt and moss, Dwyghte was paralyzed, and Mrondi`r was babbling incoherently, all three of them seemed very scared. The effects wore off after about ten minutes. We left the horses in the forest as we considered it unlikely that they had the psyche to overcome the magical effects. We sneaked in a pack towards the middle of the wasteland where we could make out some elevations in the terrain, the sneaking was not successful but we still experienced no problems.


We arrive in the middle and see this formation, checking out the largest pile first (#3 in illustrations).


Mrondir tries to climb, but slips and drags the moss covering a large door with him. On the door it says Forbidden in an archaic Dwarven dialect. The lock turns out to be impossible to pick. WE check out a small pile (no. 1 in the illustration) instead, we lift away a stone and see that it is a kind of sunken ruin. Inside finds a dead dwarf with a dagger in his back praying before an altar with a bronze statue. (see illustration 3) The dwarf has been dead for a long time and has a key that we take with us further. We dare not touch the statue even though it looks precious, it has precious stones and "bleeding hands" long limbs, long beard. (see illustration 4)

With a new key, we go back to the main door and lock ourselves in. Down the stairs you arrive in a large hall with three corridors. (see illustration 5)

Small pile left.jpg
We explore the right and left corridors, there are two symmetrical corridors with 10 niches each with its own coffin. The end chests are larger and are lined up against the wall. We decide to open one chest at a time, every time we open one another opens automatically (mirrored pattern) inside the chests are angry dwarf skeletons which we fight relatively painlessly as we only fight two at a time.
Everything goes well, we get to the end of the left corridor and discover a crack in the wall, it appears to be a collapsed corridor, Helmut clears away stones and has a small landslide, Mrondi`r and figma go further inside. They find a very scary ghostly flying monster.
The foghorn is heard for the first time. Figma try to shut the ghost in but it goes straight through the wall and attacks Helmut who goes down for the count it was at this point that we realized we had underestimated the company's healing abilities (The rest of the report is therefore described based on various retellings from non-passed out group members).
Partly due to stress from the fog and partly due to fear of the ghost, attempts were not made to fight the enemy but rather to convince the monster to let us go, all attempts were unsuccessful but we think it should be possible to talk to it even if we failed self.
Mrondi`r chooses to run from the company but shoots a couple of arrows, the arrows seem to "get stuck floating" inside its body, he should take no credit for the rest coming back alive, bad atmosphere.
Figma, Dwyghte and Maurice try to drag Helmut out with them as they are attacked, Maurice also goes down for the count. Dwyghte and Figma barely manage to get each of their bodies to the exit.
The ghost shouts about a thief and thieves, has clearly been robbed of something important, mentions a name (rondir/rondo?) and wants "the princess's right of inheritance back" probably the reason for the haunting. It turns out that the ghost cannot follow us out of the ruin. We barely make it out of the fog.
in summary, we think there is a large chest and two small ones with unchallenged skeletons left, furthermore, the small pile on the right has not been explored and not the hallway in the middle. the ghost must also be dealt with.