Expedition 14 - An audience with the wizard

Arrived at wizard’s castle in light rain. Severe structural damage, caused by chief armor, now inside main castle. Bridge destroyed. Lured swords outside, killed them. Ignur forged long ladder. Ritz and Timou found inhabited hill on island in lake, not yet investigated. Went across ladder and inside main castle. Talked to Puff, hiding. Attacked large armor and two smaller armors. Bound main armor with web spell. Timou made for excellent meat shield. M’rondir landed killing blow. Everyone exhilarated. Alas.

Puff very happy. Ritz and Ignur in disguise, so not to be recognized after former war crimes against furniture. Received 1000 gold as reward. Led into top of tower to meet dwarf wizard Quen Carellon. Hideous sight. Naked, weakened, bound to chair and force fed rat mush through system of tubes. Kept alive through exposure to fog (purple zigzag rash across whole body) and machinations of furniture. Puff of belief if Quen dead, furniture will die too. Not true, Polymorph not concentration spell. Read Quen’s mind. Mostly screaming. Learned Quen controlled armors, trying to kill himself. Asked about Rondo’s whereabouts, got vision of inhabited hill in lake outside. Must investigate.

Ritz killed Quen, out of mercy. Puff shocked, but still alive. Almost agreed to come along to Stone-Upon-Hill when Ritz mentioned Aburaguzgul. Puff now recognized Ritz and Ignur. Attacked. Swallowed Ritz and forced a fight. Made Puff surrender after killing Carpet, but by then too late. Ritz dead. Puff not just stupid, but evil. No more mercy for Puff. Fog horn sounded, and Puff teleported away before we could land killing blow. Packed Ritz in Carpet and rode for home. Brought painting from Quen’s room, possible clue.

On way home, ran into riders: Handsome blond man named Vic, dragonborn + others. Works for Night Owl, infamous Soskni crime lord. Showed a forged letter from Sasha Yarna stating Ritz died many days ago. Also believes Ritz is male. Claims to have base in Stormfyord, looks to be headed for Desert Disaster.

Note: Don’t trust furniture any longer.